-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Lab 8: Horizon Dashboard Installation
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

The OpenStack dashboard, also known as Horizon, is a Web interface that enables cloud administrators and users to manage various OpenStack resources and services.
The dashboard enables web-based interactions with the OpenStack Compute cloud controller through the OpenStack APIs.

Step 1:
SSH to AIO node with the credentials in Lab access
Enter following command and Type pass as the [sudo] password 
sudo su -
source ~/openrc.sh
Install Horizon

Step 2:
Install the dashboard on the node that can contact the Identity Service as root. Remove the openstack-dashboard-ubuntu-theme package. This theme prevents translations, several menus as well as the network map from rendering correctly: 
apt-get install apache2 memcached libapache2-mod-wsgi openstack-dashboard -y
apt-get remove --purge openstack-dashboard-ubuntu-theme -y
Step 3:
Edit /etc/openstack-dashboard/local_settings.py and change OPENSTACK_HOST to the hostname of your Identity Service:
vi /etc/openstack-dashboard/local_settings.py
OPENSTACK_HOST = "aioX"

Step 4:
Start the Apache web server and memcached:
service apache2 restart
service memcached restart

Step 5:
Open the webbrowser and type http://aio node IP address/horizon
Type user name as admin and password as pass

 ***  STOP HERE ***  STOP HERE ***
 Continue on and complete labs 9, 10 and 10a prior to returning to the next section finishing this lab.

-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Lab 8a: Log in to the dashboard
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
The dashboard is available on the node with the nova-dashboard server role.
1.	Ask the cloud operator for the host name or public IP address from which you can access the dashboard, and for your user name and password.
2.	Open a web browser that has JavaScript and cookies enabled.
To use the Virtual Network Computing (VNC) client for the dashboard, your browser must support HTML5 Canvas and HTML5 WebSockets. The VNC client is based on noVNC. For details, see noVNC: HTML5 VNC Client. For a list of supported browsers, see Browser support.
3.	In the address bar, enter the host name or IP address for the dashboard.
	http://ipAddressOrHostName/horizon

If a certificate warning appears when you try to access the URL for the first time, a self-signed certificate is in use, which is not considered trustworthy by default. Verify the certificate or add an exception in the browser to bypass the warning.
4.	On the Log In page, enter your user name and password, and click Sign In.
The top of the window displays your user name. You can also access Settings or sign out of the dashboard.
The visible tabs and functions in the dashboard depend on the access permissions, or roles, of the user you are logged in as.
•	If you are logged in as an end user, the Project tab is displayed.
•	If you are logged in as an administrator, the Project tab and Admin tab are displayed.
OpenStack dashboard—Project tab
Projects are organizational units in the cloud, and are also known as tenants or accounts. Each user is a member of one or more projects. Within a project, a user creates and manages instances.
From the Project tab, you can view and manage the resources in a selected project, including instances and images. You select the project from the CURRENT PROJECT list at the top of the tab.
 
From the Project tab, you can access the following tabs:
Compute tab
Overview	View reports for the project.
Instances	View, launch, create a snapshot from, stop, pause, or reboot instances, or connect to them through VNC.
Volumes	Use the following tabs to complete these tasks:
Volumes
View, create, edit, and delete volumes.
Volume Snapshots
View, create, edit, and delete volume snapshots.
Images	View images and instance snapshots created by project users, plus any images that are publicly available. Create, edit, and delete images, and launch instances from images and snapshots.
Access & Security	Use the following tabs to complete these tasks:
Security Groups
View, create, edit, and delete security groups and security group rules.
Key Pairs
View, create, edit, import, and delete key pairs.
Floating IPs
Allocate an IP address to or release it from a project.
API Access
View API endpoints.
Network tab
Network Topology	View the network topology.
Networks	Create and manage public and private networks.
Routers	Create and manage subnets.
Object Store tab
Containers	Create and manage containers and objects.
Orchestration tab
Containers	Use the REST API to orchestrate multiple composite cloud applications.

OpenStack dashboard—Admin tab

Administrative users can use the Admin tab to view usage and to manage instances, volumes, flavors, images, projects, users, services, and quotas.
 
Access the following categories to complete these tasks:
System Panel tab
Overview	View basic reports.
Resource Usage	Use the following tabs to view the following usages:
Daily Report
View the daily report.
Stats
View the statistics of all resources.
Hypervisors	View the hypervisor summary.
Host Aggregates	View, create, and edit host aggregates. View the list of availability zones.
Instances	View, pause, resume, suspend, migrate, soft or hard reboot, and delete running instances that belong to users of some, but not all, projects. Also, view the log for an instance or access an instance through VNC.
Volumes	View, create, edit, and delete volumes and volume types.
Flavors	View, create, edit, view extra specifications for, and delete flavors. A flavor is size of an instance.
Images	View, create, edit properties for, and delete custom images.
Networks	View, create, edit properties for, and delete networks.
Routers	View, create, edit properties for, and delete routers.
System Info	Use the following tabs to view the service information:
Services
View a list of the services.
Compute Services
View a list of all Compute services.
Network Agents
View the network agents.
Default Quotas
View default quota values. Quotas are hard-coded in OpenStack Compute and define the maximum allowable size and number of resources.
Identity Panel tab
Projects	View, create, assign users to, remove users from, and delete projects.
Users	View, create, enable, disable, and delete users.

------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
Lab 8b: Upload and manage image
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
A virtual machine image, referred to in this document simply as an image, is a single file that contains a virtual disk that has a bootable operating system installed on it. Images are used to create virtual machine instances within the cloud. For information about creating image files, see the OpenStack Virtual Machine Image Guide.
Depending on your role, you may have permission to upload and manage virtual machine images. Operators might restrict the upload and management of images to cloud administrators or operators only. If you have the appropriate privileges, you can use the dashboard to upload and manage images in the admin project.
You can also use the glance and nova command-line clients or the Image Service and Compute APIs to manage images. See the section called “Manage images”.

Upload an image
Follow this procedure to upload an image to a project.

1.	Log in to the dashboard.

2.	From the CURRENT PROJECT on the Project tab, select the appropriate project.

3.	On the Project tab, click Images.

4.	Click Create Image.
The Create an Image dialog box appears.

5.	Enter the following values:
Name	Enter a name for the image.
Description	Optionally, enter a brief description of the image.
Image Source	Choose the image source from the list. Your choices are Image Location and Image File.
Image File or Image Location	Based on your selection for Image Source, you either enter the location URL of the image in the Image Location field. or browse to the image file on your system and add it.
e.g. http source and:
http://10.1.1.92/images/cirros-0.3.2-x86_64-disk.img
Format	Select the correct format (for example, QCOW2) for the image.
Architecture	Specify the architecture. For example, i386 for a 32-bit architecture or x86-64for a 64-bit architecture.
Minimum Disk (GB) andMinimum RAM (MB)	Leave these optional fields empty.
Public	Select this check box to make the image public to all users with access to the current project.
Protected	Select this check box to ensure that only users with permissions can delete the image.

6.	Click Create Image.
The image is queued to be uploaded. It might take some time before the status changes from Queued to Active.
Update an image
Follow this procedure to update an existing image.

1.	Log in to the dashboard.

2.	From the CURRENT PROJECT on the Project tab, select the appropriate project.

3.	On the Project tab, click Images.

4.	Select the image that you want to edit.

5.	In the Actions column, click More and then select Edit from the list.

6.	In the Update Image dialog box, you can perform the following actions:
•	Change the name of the image.
•	Select the Public check box to make the image public.
•	Clear the Public check box to make the image private.

7.	Click Update Image.
Delete an image
Deletion of images is permanent and cannot be reversed. Only users with the appropriate permissions can delete images.

1.	Log in to the dashboard.

2.	From the CURRENT PROJECT on the Project tab, select the appropriate project.

3.	On the Project tab, click Images.

4.	Select the images that you want to delete.

5.	Click Delete Images.

6.	In the Confirm Delete Image dialog box, click Delete Images to confirm the deletion.

-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Lab 8c: Configure access and security for instances
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Before you launch an instance, you should add security group rules to enable users to ping and use SSH to connect to the instance. To do so, you either add rules to the default security group or add a security group with rules.
Key pairs are SSH credentials that are injected into an instance when it is launched. To use key pair injection, the image that the instance is based on must contain the cloud-init package. Each project should have at least one key pair. For more information, see the section called “Add a key pair”.
If you have generated a key pair with an external tool, you can import it into OpenStack. The key pair can be used for multiple instances that belong to a project. For more information, see the section called “Import a key pair”.
When an instance is created in OpenStack, it is automatically assigned a fixed IP address in the network to which the instance is assigned. This IP address is permanently associated with the instance until the instance is terminated. However, in addition to the fixed IP address, a floating IP address can also be attached to an instance. Unlike fixed IP addresses, floating IP addresses are able to have their associations modified at any time, regardless of the state of the instances involved.

Add a rule to the default security group
This procedure enables SSH and ICMP (ping) access to instances. The rules apply to all instances within a given project, and should be set for every project unless there is a reason to prohibit SSH or ICMP access to the instances.
This procedure can be adjusted as necessary to add additional security group rules to a project, if your cloud requires them.

1.	Log in to the dashboard, choose a project, and click Access & Security. The Security Groups tab shows the security groups that are available for this project.

2.	Select the default security group and click Edit Rules.

3.	To allow SSH access, click Add Rule.

4.	In the Add Rule dialog box, enter the following values:

Rule	SSH
Remote	CIDR
CIDR	0.0.0.0/0

To accept requests from a particular range of IP addresses, specify the IP address block in the CIDR box.

5.	Click Add.
Instances will now have SSH port 22 open for requests from any IP address.

6.	To add an ICMP rule, click Add Rule.

7.	In the Add Rule dialog box, enter the following values:
Rule	All ICMP
Direction	Ingress
Remote	CIDR
CIDR	0.0.0.0/0

8.	Click Add.
Instances will now accept all incoming ICMP packets.

Add a key pair
Create at least one key pair for each project.

1.	Log in to the dashboard, choose a project, and click Access & Security.

2.	Click the Keypairs tab, which shows the key pairs that are available for this project.

3.	Click Create Keypair.

4.	In the Create Keypair dialog box, enter a name for your key pair, and click Create Keypair.

5.	Respond to the prompt to download the key pair.
 Import a key pair
If you don’t have a keypair on your local machine (aka OS-X or Linux or the AIO control host):
cat ~/.ssh/id_rsa.pub
If that is blank, then:
ssh-keygen –t rsa –f ~/.ssh/id_rsa –N ''

1.	Log in to the dashboard, choose a project, and click Access & Security.

2.	Click the Keypairs tab, which shows the key pairs that are available for this project.

3.	Click Import Keypair.

4.	In the Import Keypair dialog box, enter the name of your key pair, copy the public key into the 
Public Key box, and then click Import Keypair.
If you are using the dashboard from a Windows computer, use PuTTYgen to load the *.pem file and convert and save it as *.ppk. For more information see the WinSCP web page for PuTTYgen.

5.	To make the key pair known to SSH, run the ssh-add command.
$ ssh-add yourPrivateKey.pem

The Compute database registers the public key of the key pair.
The dashboard lists the key pair on the Access & Security tab, though you can not download the public keypair directly from horizon.
Allocate a floating IP address to an instance
When an instance is created in OpenStack, it is automatically assigned a fixed IP address in the network to which the instance is assigned. This IP address is permanently associated with the instance until the instance is terminated.
However, in addition to the fixed IP address, a floating IP address can also be attached to an instance. Unlike fixed IP addresses, floating IP addresses can have their associations modified at any time, regardless of the state of the instances involved. This procedure details the reservation of a floating IP address from an existing pool of addresses and the association of that address with a specific instance.

1.	Log in to the dashboard, choose a project, and click Access & Security.

2.	Click the Floating IPs tab, which shows the floating IP addresses allocated to instances.

3.	Click Allocate IP to Project.

4.	Choose the pool from which to pick the IP address.

5.	Click Allocate IP.

6.	In the Floating IPs list, click Associate.

7.	In the Manage Floating IP Associations dialog box, choose the following options:
•	The IP Address field is filled automatically, but you can add a new IP address by clicking the + button.
•	In the Ports to be associated field, select a port from the list.

8.	The list shows all the instances with their fixed IP addresses.

9.	Click Associate.
To disassociate an IP address from an instance, click the Disassociate button.
To release the floating IP address back into the pool of addresses, click the More button and select the Release Floating IP option.

-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Lab 8d: Launch and manage instances
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Instances are virtual machines that run inside the cloud.
You can launch an instance from the following sources:
•	Images uploaded to the OpenStack Image Service, as described in the section called “Upload and manage images”.
•	Image that you have copied to a persistent volume. The instance launches from the volume, which is provided by the cinder-volume API through iSCSI.
Launch an instance
When you launch an instance from an image, OpenStack creates a local copy of the image on the compute node where the instance starts.
When you launch an instance from a volume, note the following steps:
•	To select the volume to from which to launch, launch an instance from an arbitrary image on the volume. The image that you select does not boot. Instead, it is replaced by the image on the volume that you choose in the next steps.
To boot a Xen image from a volume, the image you launch in must be the same type, fully virtualized or paravirtualized, as the one on the volume.
•	Select the volume or volume snapshot from which to boot. Enter a device name. Enter vda for KVM images or xvda for Xen images.

1.	Log in to the dashboard, choose a project, and click Images.
The dashboard shows the images that have been uploaded to OpenStack Image Service and are available for this project.
For details on creating images, see Creating images manually in the OpenStack Virtual Machine Image Guide.

2.	Select an image and click Launch.

3.	In the Launch Instance dialog box, specify the following values:

Details tab
Availability Zone	By default, this value is set to the availability zone given by the cloud provider (for example, us-west or apac-south). For some cases, it could be nova.
Instance Name	Assign a name to the virtual machine.
The name you assign here becomes the initial host name of the server. After the server is built, if you change the server name in the API or change the host name directly, the names are not updated in the dashboard.
Server names are not guaranteed to be unique when created so you could have two instances with the same host name. 
Flavor	Specify the size of the instance to launch.
The flavor is selected based on the size of the image selected for launching an instance. For example, while creating an image, if you have entered the value in the Minimun RAM (MB)field as 2048, then on selecting the image, the default flavor is m1.small. 
Instance Count	To launch multiple instances, enter a value greater than 1. The default is 1.
Instance Boot Source	Your options are:
Boot from image
If you choose this option, a new field for Image Name displays. You can select the image from the list.
Boot from snapshot
If you choose this option, a new field for Instance Snapshotdisplays. You can select the snapshot from the list.
Boot from volume
If you choose this option, a new field for Volume displays. You can select the volume from the list.
Boot from image (creates a new volume)
With this option, you can boot from an image and create a volume by entering the Device Size and Device Name for your volume. Click the Delete on Terminate option to delete the volume on terminating the instance.
Boot from volume snapshot (creates a new volume)
Using this option, you can boot from a volume snapshot and create a new volume by choosing Volume Snapshot from a list and adding a Device Name for your volume. Click the Delete on Terminateoption to delete the volume on terminating the instance.
Since you are launching an instance from an image, Boot from image is chosen by default.
Image Name	This field changes based on your previous selection. Since you have chosen to launch an instance using an image, the Image Name field displays. Select the image name from the dropdown list.
Access & Security tab
Keypair	Specify a key pair.
If the image uses a static root password or a static key set (neither is recommended), you do not need to provide a key pair to launch the instance.
Security Groups	Activate the security groups that you want to assign to the instance.
Security groups are a kind of cloud firewall that defines which incoming network traffic is forwarded to instances. For details, see the section called “Add a rule to the default security group”.
If you have not created any security groups, you can assign only the default security group to the instance.
Networking tab
Selected Networks	To add a network to the instance, click the + in the Available Networksfield.
Post-Creation tab
Customization Script	Specify a customization script that runs after your instance launches.
Advanced Options tab
Disk Partition	Select the type of disk partition from the dropdown list.
Automatic
Entire disk is single partition and automatically resizes.
Manual
Faster build times but requires manual partitioning.

4.	Click Launch.
The instance starts on a compute node in the cloud.
The Instances tab shows the instance's name, its private and public IP addresses, size, status, task, and power state.
If you did not provide a key pair, security groups, or rules, users can access the instance only from inside the cloud through VNC. Even pinging the instance is not possible without an ICMP rule configured. To access the instance through a VNC console, see the section called “Access an instance through a console”.
Connect to your instance by using SSH
To use SSH to connect to your instance, you use the downloaded keypair file.
The user name is ubuntu for the Ubuntu cloud images on TryStack.

1.	Copy the IP address for your instance.

2.	Use the ssh command to make a secure connection to the instance. For example:
$ ssh -i MyKey.pem ubuntu@10.0.0.2

3.	At the prompt, type yes.
Track usage for instances
You can track usage for instances for each project. You can track costs per month by showing metrics like number of vCPUs, disks, RAM, and uptime for all your instances.
1.	Log in to the dashboard, choose a project, and click Overview.

2.	To query the instance usage for a month, select a month and click Submit.

3.	To download a summary, click Download CSV Summary.

Create an instance snapshot

1.	Log in to the dashboard, choose a project, and click Instances.

2.	Select the instance from which to create a snapshot.

3.	In the Actions column, click Create Snapshot.

4.	In the Create Snapshot dialog box, enter a name for the snapshot, and click Create Snapshot.
The Images category shows the instance snapshot.
To launch an instance from the snapshot, select the snapshot and click Launch. Proceed with the section called “Launch an instance”.

Manage an instance

1.	Log in to the dashboard, choose a project, and click Instances.

2.	Select an instance.

3.	In the More list in the Actions column, select the state.
You can resize or rebuild an instance. You can also choose to view the instance console log, edit instance or the security groups. Depending on the current state of the instance, you can pause, resume, suspend, soft or hard reboot, or terminate it.

-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Lab 8e: Create and manage volumes
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Volumes are block storage devices that you attach to instances to enable persistent storage. You can attach a volume to a running instance or detach a volume and attach it to another instance at any time. You can also create a snapshot from or delete a volume. Only administrative users can create volume types.
Create a volume

1.	Log in to the dashboard, choose a project, and click Volumes.

2.	Click Create Volume.
In the dialog box that opens, enter or select the following values.
Volume Name	Specify a name for the volume.
Description	Optionally, provide a brief description for the volume.
Type	Leave this field blank.
Size (GB)	The size of the volume in gigabytes.
Volume Source	Select one of the following options:
No source, empty volume
Creates an empty volume.
An empty volume does not contain a file system or a partition table.
Snapshot
If you choose this option, a new field for Use snapshot as a source displays. You can select the snapshot from the list.
Image
If you choose this option, a new field for Use image as a sourcedisplays. You can select the image from the list.
Select the Availability Zone from the list. By default, this value is set to the availability zone given by the cloud provider (for example,us-west or apac-south). For some cases, it could be nova.
Volume
If you choose this option, a new field for Use volume as a sourcedisplays. You can select the volume from the list.
Options to use a snapshot or a volume as the source for a volume are displayed only if there are existing snapshots or volumes. 

3.	Click Create Volume.
The dashboard shows the volume on the Volumes tab.
Attach a volume to an instance
After you create one or more volumes, you can attach them to instances. You can attach a volume to one instance at a time.

1.	Log in to the dashboard, choose a project, and click Volumes.

2.	Select the volume to add to an instance and click Edit Attachments.

3.	In the Manage Volume Attachments dialog box, select an instance.

4.	Enter the name of the device from which the volume is accessible by the instance.
The actual device name might differ from the volume name because of hypervisor settings.

5.	Click Attach Volume.
The dashboard shows the instance to which the volume is now attached and the device name.
You can view the status of a volume in the Volumes tab of the dashboard. The volume is either Available or In-Use.
Now you can log in to the instance and mount, format, and use the disk.
Detach a volume from an instance

1.	Log in to the dashboard, choose a project, and click Volumes.

2.	Select the volume and click Edit Attachments.

3.	Click Detach Volume and confirm your changes.

A message indicates whether the action was successful.
Create a snapshot from a volume

1.	Log in to the dashboard, choose a project, and click Volumes.

2.	Select a volume from which to create a snapshot.

3.	From the More list, select Create Snapshot.

4.	In the dialog box that opens, enter a snapshot name and a brief description.

5.	Confirm your changes.
The dashboard shows the new volume snapshot in Volume Snapshots tab.

Edit a volume

1.	Log in to the dashboard, choose a project, and click Volumes.

2.	From the CURRENT PROJECT on the Project tab, select the appropriate project.

3.	On the Project tab, click Volumes.

4.	Select the image that you want to edit.

5.	In the Actions column, click Edit Volume.

6.	In the Edit Volume dialog box, update the name and description of the image.

7.	Click Edit Volume.
You can extend a volume by using the Extend Volume option available in the More dropdown list and entering the new value for volume size.

Delete a volume
When you delete an instance, the data in its attached volumes is not destroyed.

1.	Log in to the dashboard, choose a project, and click Volumes.

2.	Select the check boxes for the volumes that you want to delete.

3.	Click Delete Volumes and confirm your choice.
A message indicates whether the action was successful. 

-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Lab 8f: Create and manage networks
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

The OpenStack Networking service provides a scalable system for managing the network connectivity within an OpenStack cloud deployment. It can easily and quickly react to changing network needs (for example, creating and assigning new IP addresses).
Networking in OpenStack is complex. This section provides the basic instructions for creating a network and a router. For detailed information about managing networks, refer to the OpenStack Cloud Administrator Guide.
Create a network

1.	Log in to the dashboard, choose a project, and click Networks.

2.	Click Create Network.

3.	In the Create Network dialog box, specify the following values.

Network tab
Network Name	Specify a name to identify the network.
Subnet tab
Create Subnet	Select this check box to create a subnet
You do not have to specify a subnet when you create a network, but if you do not, any attached instance receives an Error status.
Subnet Name	Specify a name for the subnet.
Network Address	Specify the IP address for the subnet.
IP Version	Select IPv4 or IPv6.
Gateway IP	Specify an IP address for a specific gateway. This parameter is optional.
Disable Gateway	Select this check box to disable a gateway IP address.
Subnet Detail tab
Enable DHCP	Select this check box to enable DHCP.
Allocation Pools	Specify IP address pools.
DNS Name Servers	Specify a name for the DNS server.
Host Routes	Specify the IP address of host routes.

4.	Click Create.
The dashboard shows the network on the Networks tab.

Create a router

1.	Log in to the dashboard, choose a project, and click Routers.

2.	Click Create Router.

3.	In the Create Router dialog box, specify a name for the router and click Create Router.
The new router is now displayed in the Routers tab.

4.	Click the new router's Set Gateway button.

5.	In the External Network field, specify the network to which the router will connect, and then click Set Gateway.

6.	To connect a private network to the newly created router, perform the following steps:
a)	On the Routers tab, click the name of the router.
b)	On the Router Details page, click Add Interface.
c)	In the Add Interface dialog box, specify the following information:
Subnet	Select a subnet.
IP Address (optional)	Enter the router interface IP address for the selected subnet.
Note: If this value is not set, then by default, the first host IP address in the subnet is used by OpenStack Networking.

The Router Name and Router ID fields are automatically updated.

7.	Click Add Interface.
You have successfully created the router. You can view the new topology from the Network Topology tab.
